---
title: Deploying docs from API Platform
authors: chris
excerpt: Get started with Bump.sh for API Platform projects.
---

[API Platform](https://api-platform.com/) is an API-first PHP framework that allows you to create REST and GraphQL APIs using PHP classes, and automatically generates their documentation, based on the OpenAPI specification. 

This guide walks you through how to deploy API definition files generated by API Platform, and how to enrich and filter those to improve the reader experience.

If you are new to API Platform, check out [their getting started guide](https://api-platform.com/docs/distribution/).

## Deploying docs from your local machine

The following assumes your local machine is configured with PHP and API Platform.

1. [Create and name](https://bump.sh/docs/new?utm_source=bump&utm_medium=content_hub&utm_campaign=getting_started) your first API documentation. Then, retrieve the name and token of this documentation from the _CI deployment_ settings page.

2. Install the Bump.sh CLI with [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/install?v=true) as below, or use [alternative options](/help/continuous-integration/cli), with
  ```shell
  npm install -g bump-cli
  ```

3. Launch your local server with [Docker](https://api-platform.com/docs/distribution/#using-the-api-platform-distribution-recommended) or [Symfony](https://api-platform.com/docs/distribution/#using-symfony-cli)

4. Deploy your doc to Bump.sh with
  ```shell
  bump deploy https://localhost/docs.json \
    --doc my-documentation-name \
    --token my-documentation-token
  ```

That's it! Enjoy the comfort of Bump.sh to browse through your API doc, and [customize it to your needs](/help/getting-started/quick-start#customization-options).

## Enriching definition files

By default, API Platform generates what can be considered a plain technical description of your API. Although it is robust and complete, it's not enough for people discovering your API without any upfront knowledge about it, access to the code, or ability to test it extensively. Such definition files require contextual information, and any appropriate adjustements.

API Platform lets you override, enrich and filter the generated OpenAPI definition files, [using PHP](https://api-platform.com/docs/core/openapi/). 

You can also accomplish this using OpenAPI's [Overlay specification](https://github.com/OAI/Overlay-Specification/blob/main/versions/1.0.0.md), which can be convenient in all use cases where you do not want to change your PHP code base (e.g. when involving Technical Writers or Product Managers in writing docs).

The Bump.sh CLI supports Overlays. Technically, the `bump overlay` command will output a modified version of the `[DEFINITION_FILE]` (an OpenAPI or AsyncAPI document) by applying the operations described in the `[OVERLAY_FILE]` Overlay file to the original API document.

1. Create your Overlay document (see example use cases in [Augmenting Generated OpenAPI Documents with Filters & Overlays](/guides/openapi/augmenting-generated-openapi))

2. Apply your Overlay document to the original API document with the Bump.sh CLI
```shell
bump overlay api-document.yaml overlay-file.yaml > api-overlayed-document.yaml
```

3. Deploy the resulting file to Bump.sh
  ```shell
  bump deploy api-overlayed-document.yaml \
    --doc my-documentation-name \
    --token my-documentation-token
  ```

> Note: The diff calculation that Bump.sh performs to display the [API changelog](/help/changes-management/changelog) is done when the resulting file is deployed.
> If you need to calculate the diff before applying Overlays (for instance when your Overlay document filters out some information), consider using the [`bump diff`](/help/continuous-integration/cli#bump-diff-file) command and the [GitHub Action](/help/continuous-integration/github-actions).
{: .info}
